Coming up next is the Science Fiction radio show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction radio show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
Collecting is a hobby or an obsession that many people engage in.
Coins, stamps, antiques, people collect almost anything and science fiction fans are certainly no exception.
There are a fair number of science fiction collectors scattered around.
Some are so-called completists who accumulate anything related to the field, while others concentrate on a particular thing.
Many science fiction collectors, for example, collect books, either paperbacks or hardbacks, are magazines having to do with science fiction or fantasy.
The Science Fiction radio show spoke with two serious collectors recently, each with a different background and a different area of interest.
The first is John Marks, a chemistry professor at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas.
The second is Bob Wayne, the owner of Fantastic World's bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas.
We asked Bob Wayne what kind of science fiction material he collects.
At this time, my main collection, I'm collecting things by Philip Jose Farmer, Michael Moorcock, and Paul Nellison.
And so I just concentrate, you know, essentially on finding things that I don't already have, and I work off of bibliographies and lists and try to find things in better condition than the ones I already have.
So looking for hardcover books that are, you know, where they were published in small quantities, and looking for paperback books that are published under pseudonyms,
or from small presses, are the things that require the most attention for finding them at inexpensive prices.
John Marks goes about it a little differently.
I started out with paperbacks and the Digest magazine.
I've gone back in terms of picking up the old pulp magazines to the point where now I have almost all of them that were ever published, starting back with Weird Tales in 1923 and Amazing Stories in 1926.
I'm very proud of my complete collection of Weird Tales, since I understand there's only about 30 copies of so many systems, and just about as good on astounding science fiction, for example.
Recently I have been branching out into hardbacks also, but I'm a long, long ways from completing that.
What about paperbacks?
Well, I have about $14,000, $15,000. Is that enough for you?
We asked John Marks if he picks up all paperbacks or just certain kinds.
There's always a problem in making the, where do you draw the line?
But I basically get everything that's clearly science fiction, everything that's clearly fantasy.
I kind of draw the line someplace in the horror vein to one side and maybe fairy tales on the other side, and sometimes I'll draw the line at an atom bomb story that's set in the near future, something like that.
But basically I get every paperback in science fiction and fantasy.
We asked Wayne what he would advise a reader who wanted to turn collector.
Well, first thing I would do, obviously a person who's going to come in and say, I want to start collecting, has already read some stuff.
So I would say to them, what have you read so far?
It can be the name of some authors that you've enjoyed, some books that you've liked.
I would springboard off of that, depointing out things that I would feel would be good collectible books within their field of interest.
So that was how I would handle that particular situation.
We asked Marks the same question and he had much the same answer.
Probably what most people will do when they start is they will pick a favorite author or author and try to get all the books by that person.
Somebody with a limited budget just starting, think, you know, that's a pretty good first step to say, for example, get every book a copy of some edition of every book that Robert A. Heinlein has written, or Andre Norton, or you name it, whoever the person happens to like.
And once they do that, and if they start getting the collecting bug, then pretty soon they'll want to trade in those later printings for first editions.
And then if they've really gotten into it, they'll want to trade in those first beat up first editions for better copies of the first editions when they do it.
They'll probably start expanding into other authors.
More on collecting on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
We're talking with two collectors of science fiction books, John Marks, a chemistry professor at Texas Tech University, and Bob Wayne, owner of the Fantastic World's bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas.
We asked Bob Wayne what makes a book valuable, a collectible item.
Well, from the simplest standpoint, what makes a hardback book collectible to anyone is simply supply and demand, and that there are more people wanting the book than there are books available at cover price.
Usually this doesn't take place, obviously, until after the book is out of print.
Oftentimes, science fiction fans will see a hardcover book and they'll say, hmm, well, if I wait a year, I can buy that in paperback, and they'll pass the book up.
And then when the book comes out in paperback, they read it and discover it's the greatest thing, since they put raisins and bread.
So they go back and they want to buy a hardcover for a durable copy.
However, at this time, the publisher has probably already either remainder the book or allowed the book to go out of print when all the copies were sold, but the people who did buy a hardcover.
And the supply of people out there looking for the book and demanding, I want a copy of book X and no books being available forces the price up on the collector's market.
The other things that can cause the book to become valuable are usually errors in the same way that a stamp being printed upside down would cause a stamp to be valuable.
If a publisher decides to accidentally destroy all the copies of a book so that only a few hundred exist, or if only a few copies are made with some variation that was corrected in another edition, this also can cause the book to be valuable.
And then you also can have a situation where you create a book just to make a book valuable.
That would be the case if you have a strictly limited edition where it's signed and numbered.
What would a real prize be for the collector of hardback science fiction books? John Marks answers this one.
Well, it depends on what you're talking about. For example, here's an example a lot of people would know about. Frank Herbert's Dune, hardcover the first edition, is worth a great deal of money simply because Dune wasn't that well known when it first came out and attract that much attention until slowly over several years.
And that first hardcover edition is extremely hard to find. So that in good condition I understand that a first edition is worth a thousand bucks. Well, I don't have a copy of it. I wouldn't mind having a copy at all, but I wouldn't pay that money for it.
But I know somebody who found one in the garage sale in Lubbock and bugged the heck out of me. It wasn't me.
We asked Marks how much a valuable science fiction paperback might be worth.
Well, I could tell you the highest price I've heard anybody charge for anything. And that was, and I don't know if they got it, this was the asking price.
It was $175 for Cat in a Canary House by Kurt Vonnegut. And that book, which is his only collection of short stories and which are all unabashedly science fiction, he vows you'll never allow reprint it as long as you live.
And there aren't all that many copies available, so the price of that thing has been really escalating. I got my copy for $3, I don't mind telling you.
With such prices for single books, collecting seems to be a good investment. We asked John Marks if it was.
My advice to somebody who wants to do that is you got to know a heck of a lot about this field before you're likely to be very successful at it.
I'm not going about it from that standpoint because just because something as old doesn't necessarily mean that it's especially valuable and what's real, it would be really difficult from the investor standpoint.
Somebody who knew very little about the field is to know which books to pick up now because 10 years from now they're going to be worth a lot. In fact, that's kind of hard for me to guess.
And I'm sure no more about it than a lot of people do.
We'll continue with the subject of collecting on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And David Carson.
John Marks is a professor of chemistry at Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas. His passion is collecting science fiction books and magazines, and he has many thousands of them.
We asked him if he had an area of concentration in his collecting.
Well, I once gave a talk on this subject and I titled it The Complete Science Fiction Collector, Confessions of a Pack Rat.
In other words, I'm very, very versatile and Catholic in my taste.
I don't like all kinds of things as much equally, but I collect anything that's published in the Science Fiction and Fantasy vein.
I get my hands on and then I can afford, which means almost.
I've got copies of almost every book that's been published.
Why does John Marks collect science fiction books? What's the fascination?
Because it's there.
That's actually, I suppose, a difficult question for anyone to answer.
First of all, you have to love books or whatever you're collecting.
This is the collector's mania. There's lots of people that collect anything from maths books to old Avon bottles, for heaven's sakes.
I collect what I enjoy from other standpoints. I enjoy the artwork on them. I enjoy reading the things.
I like to read at least the representative book by any author that's important in the field and so on.
I just love books. I love to handle them. I love to sort them, catalog them, put them away, just look at them.
That's what I do with a fair portion of my spare time, I guess.
But why collect science fiction books? Why not coins or stamps or seashells?
Because I love science fiction.
Something we haven't gotten into the conversation yet is, here at Texas Tech, I also am involved in helping the team teach the course in science fiction.
We have a special course through our honors program and there are three or four of us every semester.
The team teaches this thing to a small group and we try to teach them principles about writing, also the creative writing course,
very much a discussion course and so on. I just love science fiction.
I don't mind reading an occasional mystery, let's say. I haven't read a western in 20 years, but I've read lots of science fiction.
That's what I like to read, that's what I like to collect.
Also, I might say that many of the older science fiction books are more valuable to collectors in general than many of those in other fields.
I'll say Comparable Age and Publisher.
We ask Marx which part of his collection he's most proud of.
My pulp magazines, I think, is sort of my own favorite among all the things.
People come into the house, visitors that know nothing about science fiction and I always trot them downstairs and show them the collection.
Kind of funny to watch somebody, you hand them one of those old pulp magazines, give them one that isn't crumbling too badly,
and then they start looking at all the old ads from the 30s or whatever.
It's kind of a history lesson just to go through the things if they don't know the stories or care about that,
especially why they find the ads more fascinating than anything.
But I started out in the terms of serious collecting with the magazines and the pulp especially.
Those early ones especially are, there just aren't very many copies around, so that's kind of my favorite part of the collection.
Would he sell his collection for a high enough price?
Probably not now. I do know somebody who retired and took around the world trip on selling his.
In the area John Marx concentrates on, paperbacks, pulps and magazines, he doubts there are many collections in the country except for libraries that surpass his.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Daryl Lane.
Bob Wayne owns a specialty bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas called Fantastic Worlds.
He sells almost anything related to science fiction or fantasy, including comics, gaming paraphernalia and video material.
He is also a collector principally of comics and hardback science fiction books.
We spoke with him recently about his hardback collection, just asking questions a curious non-collector might think of.
What, for instance, does he consider the ultimate for a hardback collector of science fiction?
Well, among the ultimate items to find in the hardcover field are some of the double-day hardcover books of recent years that had very small printings and for one reason or another had very small distribution.
To the come to mind are Roger Zalassny's Nine Princes in Amber and Philip Jose Farmer's Flesh.
And I would be in the position of passing apocryphal, potentially, stories about why these books are in slow editions or small editions.
But my understanding is that both of these books were re-magnored very quickly upon publication and had very little distribution outside of review copies and library copies.
So those books are both hard to find. I've only seen two copies of either of those books in the time that I've been collecting books and looking at hardcover since about 69.
We also asked him if he ever made any accidental finds, any nuggets that he hadn't been expecting.
I've had a number of strokes of what I would have to consider luck as far as finding books that I consider to be quite valuable.
I was at a book fair at one time with Lewis Shiner, a short story writer who's appeared in Omni and Shea all in various magazines.
And we were just looking through tons and tons of hardcover books, miles and miles of historical romances.
And we were giving up and over in a little bitty pile on the side, there was a little bitty book.
It was a little bit sticking out and looked familiar.
It was a Nome Press book written by Henry Cuttner and the name Lewis Padgett called Robots Have No Tales that was in perfect condition and they had priced it, but I thought it was the outrageous price of 40 cents.
But I went on ahead and paid the 40 cents.
That was a tough blow to pay that much money for a book worth just 100, 200 times more than that, but I was able to tear loose the money.
We wondered if there was any part of his collection he's most proud of.
I would have to say that there's not really any one item that I'm most proud of as far as being difficult to find.
I do have a one of a kind item in my collection that I purchased at an auction this last summer.
It's a translation from the French of the book, Thillpose Farmer conquers the universe that Thillpose Farmer donated to an auction at a convention that my store sponsored in Dallas during the summer.
And that has a cover letter and it's signed by Thillpose Farmer and a copy of the book in French that was translated from.
It's a translation that the publisher who has the option on this book, Berkeley Books, has decided that they did not want to publish in that form.
So that will be the only version of that in English.
So I suppose as far as the rarity, having the only copy floating around of that should be a novelty to some extent.
Collecting in the science fiction field is becoming a popular hobby among science fiction and fantasy fans.
Fans will collect anything too, books, magazines, comics, movie memorabilia, artwork, and so on.
If you're interested, Bob Wayne can help you out with advice or material. Just contact the Fantastic World's bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thanks for watching!
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us!
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl A.
And David Carson.
Older readers and fans of science fiction may be bewildered at what's happened to their field today.
Science fiction is not found only in books and movies anymore. It's spilled over into role-playing games like Dungeons & Dragons and into numerous video games for home television and computers.
The market for materials related to these games is tremendous, but so is the market for traditional science fiction books and magazines.
Bob Wayne, owner of Fantastic World's bookstore in Fort Worth, Texas, supplies customers in both areas. We asked him to tell us about Fantastic World's.
Fantastic World's bookstore, the store that I own, started off two and a half years ago and we specialize in items of the fantastic.
We have comic books, science fiction books, fantasy role-playing games, video games, and science fiction movies on videotape.
And all the other paraphernalia that you would expect in relation to those items.
For example, lead miniatures for role-playing games or dice, bags to put comics in, boxes, posters, portfolios, movie posters.
Just an assortment of things related. We go all the way from talking animals like Garfield to Superman to Doctor Who and to Felix the Cat.
As to why a variety of things, the only common element is that they're all science fiction fantasy concepts to some extent.
Wayne also collects both comics and science fiction hardbacks. We asked him to tell us how he began his collection.
The way I got started in collecting is actually the way I got started in reading. My paternal grandfather was a bus driver.
He used to pick up the comic books that people left on the bus and bring them, and I would get them from him.
So I learned how to read when I was about five years old by reading comic books that were left on buses.
So everyone who rode on a bus through a bunch of Texas in 1959, 1958, 1960, I'm in their debt for being able to read from an early age and from my love of comics and science fiction.
And I went from that to keeping the comics that I had read and putting them on a little shelf in my closet.
And from that point began to snowball where I began picking up anything that I felt was related to comics.
And then I eventually got into science fiction reading when I met Fritz Leiber at a convention in 1968.
Wayne says his collection led into his becoming the founder and proprietor of Fantastic Worlds. He tells us how that happened.
At one point, you know, I noticed that my personal taste in comic books, the ones that I felt were the superior examples of comic books as an art.
And the ones that seem to be increasing in value on the collector's market had a lot in common.
And I began to feel that there was the potential that if I picked up a couple of extra copies of the ones that I felt were really good comics that they would appreciate in value faster than just going in and buying them.
And I began to be buying a handful at random. And so I began to speculate in comic books by buying them in the hope that someone would come along later and want to pay me more money for them than I had paid for it myself.
And then I began to do the same thing with science fiction books.
But on the smaller margin, I began buying books from England, which were not generally available in this country in the late 70s, and taking them to conventions and selling those.
And I kept sending aside more and more extra comics and more and more books.
And I realized that I had to either buy myself a larger house to store all this stuff in, that I was only using a couple of times a year, or going ahead and open a store for retailing.
I chose to open a store because this has much more tax evan just to owning a house just to store books in.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Thank you for watching.